Add tutorial for using the Preferences API (#25)
fyne-io/fyne-io.github.io: _tutorials/preferences-api.md

order: 50
redirect_from: /develop/preferences-api.html
---

## Using the Preferences API

---

Storing user configurations and values is a common task for application developers, but implementing it across multiple platforms can be tedious and time-consuming. To make it easier, Fyne has an API for storing values on the filesystem in a clean and understandable way while the complex parts are handled for you.

Lets start with the setup of the API. It is part of the [Preferences](https://pkg.go.dev/fyne.io/fyne?tab=doc#Preferences) interface where storage and loading functions exist for values of Bool, Float, Int and String. They each consist of three different functions, one for loading, one loading with a fallback value and lastly, one for storing values. An example of the three functions and their behaviour can be seen below for the String type:
```go
// String looks up a string value for the key
String(key string) string
// StringWithFallback looks up a string value and returns the given fallback if not found
StringWithFallback(key, fallback string) string
// SetString saves a string value for the given key
SetString(key string, value string)
```

> These functions can be accessed through the created application variable and the `Preferences()` interface on top of it. Please note that it is necessary to create the apps with a unique ID (usually like a reversed url). This means that the application will need to be created using `app.NewWithID()` to have its own place to store values. It can roughly be used like the example below:

Reviewer: Oh, sorry - but `Preferences()` is a method not an interface.

```suggestion
These functions can be accessed through the created application variable and calling the `Preferences()` method on. Please note that it is necessary to create the apps with a unique ID (usually like a reversed url). This means that the application will need to be created using `app.NewWithID()` to have its own place to store values. It can roughly be used like the example below:
```

---
layout: develop
title: Using the Preferences API

summary: The Fyne toolkit includes a Preferences API that makes it easy for developers to store values locally on the computer and then grab them again when necessary.

order: 50
redirect_from: /develop/preferences-api.html
---

## Using the Preferences API

---

> Writing filesystem code is a common task for application developers and, to make that easier, Fyne has an API for storing values on the filesystem in a clean and understandable way while Fyne handles the complex parts for you.

Reviewer: I don't think this API is about simplifying filesystem access (more APIs to come for that ;)) - it's more about making it simple to store user configuration. Admittedly filesystem is often a part of that, but it's not the main factor I don't think?

Author: Yeah you are right. It is more about making it easier to implement configuration storage across more platforms in my opinion.

Lets start with the setup of the API. It is part of the [Preferences](https://pkg.go.dev/fyne.io/fyne?tab=doc#Preferences) interface where storage and loading functions exist for values of Bool, Float, Int and String. They each consist of three different functions, one for loading, one loading with a fallback value and lastly, one for storing values. An example of the three functions and their behaviour can be seen below for the String type:
```go
// String looks up a string value for the key
String(key string) string
// StringWithFallback looks up a string value and returns the given fallback if not found
StringWithFallback(key, fallback string) string
// SetString saves a string value for the given key
SetString(key string, value string)
```

> These functions can be accessed through the created application variable and it is necessary that it is created with a unique ID. This means that the application will need to be created using `app.NewWithID()` to have its own place to store values. the can roughly be used like the example below:

Reviewer: This paragraph should maybe introduce the `Preferences()` method to get access to these functions?

```go

> a := app.NewWithID("fyne-preferences-api-tutorial")

Reviewer: Best practice is probably reverse-url format like java packages: "com.example.tutorial.preferences". 
Either way it needs to be globally unique.

Author: Yeah. I was using `io.fyne.tutorial.preferences` at first but thought that it might make users use their own that also started with `io.fyne`. Will use the `com.example.tutorial.preferences` and explain that they usually are reverse urls.

[...]

> a.Preferences().SetBool("Boolean?", true)

Reviewer: I don't think we should encourage special characters in these fields. we sometimes need to delegate to underlying preference storage and I'm not certain we check for all these eventualities yet...

Author: Sure thing. Just thought it was kind of funny when I wrote it. Will remove it :)

number := a.Preferences().IntWithFallback("ApplicationLuckyNumber", 21)
expression := a.Preferences().String("RegularExpression")
[...]
```

To show this, we are going to build a simple little app that always closes after a set amount of time. This timeout should be user changeable and applied on the next start of the application.

Let us start by creating a variable called `timeout` that will be used to store time in the form of `time.Second`.
```go
timeout := time.Second

```

Then we could create a select widget to let the user select the timeout from a couple pre-defined strings and then multiplying the timeout by the number of seconds that the string relates to. Lastly, the `"AppTimeout"` key is used to set the string value to the selected one.
```go
timeoutSelector := widget.NewSelect([]string{"10 seconds", "30 seconds", "1 minute"}, func(selected string) {
    switch selected {

>     case "10 seconds":

Reviewer: Unfortunately this could break - if I select "1 minute" and then select "30 seconds" it will result in timeout = 30 minutes... (as you are continually multiplying the same value. It would be cleaner to set a time or an int value directly in each of these cases.

Author: Yeah you are right. I don't really know what I thought here. There is a lot of potential breakage here. Good catch :)

        timeout *= 10
    case "30 seconds":
        timeout *= 30
    case "1 minute":
        timeout *= 60
    }
  

>     a.Preferences().SetString("AppTimeout", selected)

Reviewer: Hmm, this seems a little strange. Really it should store the number, not the string - that would avoid a lot of string comparison code.

Reviewer: I'll just leave that as a thought rather than a request for change. It's possible that the code when storing ints could be more complex, I see from how you use the setter and callback that it's quite neat.

Author: Yeah that was the idea from my part too. It is much simpler to do it this way, but like you say, it is definitely a bit of a weird way to do it.
